AT3 Video Demonstration Script

Hello everyone. My name is Asbin Pandey, and this is my AT3 video demonstration for my Final Year Project.

The title of my project is Student Task Management Web Application.

This project is designed for university students to help them manage coursework, deadlines, reminders, and study progress in one place.

The system is built as a web application and also works as a Progressive Web Application, or PWA, which means it provides a more app-like experience and includes offline support.

In this video, I will explain the purpose of the project, show the main features of the system, demonstrate the deployed application, briefly show the source code structure, and explain how the project aligns with the AT2 brief.

Part 1: Project Introduction

The main aim of this project is to solve a common problem faced by students.
Many students have multiple assignments, class deadlines, reminders, and modules to manage at the same time.
Often, this information is spread across notebooks, calendars, or different apps.
So I developed one central system where students can register, log in, create tasks, manage deadlines, organise tasks by category, and track progress through a dashboard.

This project focuses on helping students stay organised, reduce missed deadlines, and improve academic time management.

Part 2: Technology Stack

For the backend, I used FastAPI, which is a Python web framework.
For database access, I used SQLAlchemy ORM.
The project supports SQLite for local use and PostgreSQL for deployed hosting.
For the frontend, I used HTML, CSS, and JavaScript.
For authentication, I used password hashing and token-based login.
For testing, I used Pytest.
The project is deployed publicly using Render.

This combination of technologies supports the AT2 requirement of using Python, relational database structure, ORM, responsive frontend design, validation, and PWA functionality.

Part 3: Project Structure

Now I am showing the project folder in Visual Studio Code.

The backend code is inside the backend folder.
The frontend code is inside the frontend folder.
The automated test is inside the tests folder.
The helper scripts are inside the scripts folder.
The requirements and submission support documents are inside the docs folder.

Important files include:
backend/main.py for API routes and backend logic,
backend/models.py for database models,
backend/schemas.py for validation,
backend/security.py for password hashing and authentication,
frontend/app.js for the main frontend logic,
frontend/service-worker.js for PWA and offline support,
and tests/test_api_smoke.py for automated verification.

Part 4: Running the System

For local demonstration, the project can be run using this helper command:

.\scripts\run_demo.ps1

This script installs dependencies, seeds demo data, and automatically selects a free port if the default one is busy.

The script then starts the backend server and opens the application through the browser using the local URL shown in the terminal.

However, for this presentation I am mainly using the deployed version of the application, because it demonstrates that the system is hosted publicly and ready to use.

If needed, the project can also be started manually using Python and Uvicorn with the backend.main module.

Part 5: Authentication

This is the login page of the Student Task Management Web Application.

The user can either log in or register a new account.
This is important because each student should only be able to access their own tasks and personal data.

The registration process includes input validation for name, email, and password.
The password is securely hashed before it is stored in the database.

Now I will log in to the system.
After login, the application opens the main dashboard.

Part 6: Dashboard

This is the main dashboard of the system.

The dashboard provides a quick summary of the student workload.
It shows today's tasks, upcoming deadlines, overdue tasks, and the overall completion rate.

This feature is useful because it gives the student an immediate overview of what needs attention.
Instead of checking each task one by one, the student can see their academic progress in a single screen.

These analytics directly support the project objective of improving productivity and helping students meet deadlines more effectively.

Part 7: Task Creation

I will now create a new task.

Here I enter the task title.
Then I add a description.
I select the due date and time.
I choose the priority level.
I choose the task status.
I can also assign the task to a module or category.
Finally, I can add a reminder time.

Now I save the task.

The new task appears in the task list.
The dashboard also updates to reflect the new task.
If the task is due soon, it appears in the upcoming deadlines section as well.

This demonstrates that the system not only stores tasks but also updates the analytics in real time.

Part 8: Validation

Validation is an important requirement in the project.

For example, if I leave the task title empty, the system shows an error.
If I choose a reminder time that is later than the due date, the system also shows an error.

This validation helps prevent common user mistakes and improves the quality of stored data.
Validation is handled on both the frontend and the backend.

Part 9: Task Editing

Now I will edit an existing task.

I click the edit button on the task.
The task details load back into the form.
I can change the title, description, due date, priority, status, category, or reminder.
After I click save, the updated task is stored in the database and the user interface refreshes.

This shows the update functionality of the system.
Task editing is important because deadlines and academic requirements can change, so users need to be able to modify their tasks easily.

Part 10: Task Completion and Deletion

Next, I will mark a task as complete.

When I do that, the task status changes and the completion rate on the dashboard updates as well.
This gives the user a clear view of progress.

Now I will delete a task that is no longer needed.
This removes the task from the list and updates the dashboard again.

Together, this demonstrates full CRUD functionality:
create, read, update, and delete.

Part 11: Categories and Modules

The system also allows tasks to be organised by category or academic module.

For example, I can create categories such as:
Web Development,
Database Systems,
Software Testing,
or Final Year Project.

This helps students organise their academic tasks subject by subject.
It also improves clarity when many tasks exist at the same time.

Part 12: Filtering and Sorting

The task list also supports filtering and sorting.

Tasks can be filtered by module, priority, or status.
They can also be sorted by due date, priority, or title.

This feature makes the interface more practical because the user can quickly find important tasks without scanning the full list manually.

Part 13: Settings and Notifications

Now I will open the settings section.

This page shows account details, sync status, and notification settings.
The user can enable browser notifications if permission is granted.
This allows reminder alerts to appear in the browser.

Notifications are useful in a student task management system because they help users remember deadlines and reduce the chance of missing important work.

Part 14: PWA and Offline Support

This application is designed as a Progressive Web Application.

It includes a manifest file and a service worker.
Because of this, it behaves more like an installable app and supports offline functionality.

Previously loaded data can still be viewed while offline.
Task actions can also be queued and later synchronised when the internet connection returns.

This is important because students may not always have a stable internet connection.
Offline support improves reliability and makes the system more useful in real situations.

Part 15: Responsive Design

Another important requirement was responsive layout.

The interface is designed to work on both desktop and mobile screens.
This means the user can access the application from a laptop, tablet, or smartphone.
The layout adjusts based on screen size while still keeping the design simple and clear.

Part 16: Database Design

I will now briefly explain the relational database structure.

The main entities in the system are:
User,
Task,
Category,
Reminder.

The User table stores the student's account information.
The Task table stores the task title, description, due date, priority, and status.
The Category table stores modules or subject groupings.
The Reminder table stores reminder times linked to tasks.

These tables are related through foreign keys, which supports proper relational data design and matches the database requirements from AT2.

Part 17: Source Code Overview

I will now briefly show the source code.

The main backend file is backend/main.py.
This contains the API routes, dashboard logic, task operations, settings, reminders, and deployment-ready backend code.

The database models are in backend/models.py.
Validation logic is in backend/schemas.py.
Authentication and password hashing are handled in backend/security.py.

On the frontend side, the main HTML structure is in frontend/index.html.
The main frontend logic is in frontend/app.js.
The offline and PWA support are handled in frontend/service-worker.js.

For local support and helper functionality, the project also includes scripts such as scripts/run_demo.ps1.

Part 18: Testing and Verification

Testing is an important part of the project.

I performed manual testing on registration, login, task creation, editing, completion, deletion, dashboard updates, categories, filtering, sorting, notifications, and offline behaviour.

I also included an automated smoke test in tests/test_api_smoke.py.
This test verifies important flows such as authentication, task CRUD, reminders, settings, and dashboard analytics.

This helps confirm that the system is reliable and functioning as expected.

Part 19: Deployment

This project has also been deployed publicly using Render.

This means the application is not only working locally but is also available online.
Public deployment makes the project more professional and easier to demonstrate.

It also shows that the application is complete enough to be hosted as a real working system.

Part 20: Alignment with AT2

Now I will briefly explain how this project aligns with the AT2 brief.

The project uses a Python backend.
It uses a relational database and SQLAlchemy ORM.
It includes secure registration and login.
It supports task CRUD operations.
It includes categories and reminders.
It provides dashboard analytics such as overdue count, completion rate, and upcoming deadlines.
It includes validation for common input errors.
It has responsive frontend design.
It supports PWA and offline functionality.

So overall, the project meets the main functional and technical expectations described in AT2.

Part 21: Conclusion

In conclusion, the Student Task Management Web Application is a complete system designed to help students organise their academic work more effectively.

It includes secure authentication, relational database storage, task management, categories, reminders, analytics, filtering, sorting, responsive design, PWA support, offline functionality, automated testing, and public deployment.

This project reflects the aims and objectives developed in my AT1 and AT2 work, and it demonstrates a practical and fully working final system for AT3.

Thank you for watching my AT3 video demonstration.
